doc: druid 37 release notes (#19287)
druid-io/druid: docs/release-info/release-notes.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Auto-compaction using compaction supervisors has been improved, now generally available, and the recommended default. Automatic compaction tasks are now prefixed with `auto` instead of `coordinator-issued`.
```

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Hadoop-based ingestion

Support for Hadoop-based ingestion has been removed. The feature was deprecated in Druid 34.

Use one of Druid's other supported ingestion methods, such as SQL-based ingestion or MiddleManager-less ingestion using Kubernetes.

[#19109](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19109)

### Query blocklist

> You can now create a query blocklist for dynamically blocking queries without restarting your deployment. You can block queries by datasource, query type, or query context using the new `/druid/coordinator/v1/config/broker` API. Block rules use `AND` logic, which means all criteria must match. Druid stores the rules in the metadata database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now use the using the `/druid/coordinator/v1/config/broker` API tp create a query blocklist to dynamically block queries by datasource, query type, or query context. The blocklist takes effect without a restarting Druid. Block rules use `AND` logic, which means all criteria must match.
```
Style suggestion. Also, not sure that it's important to note that the rules are stored in the metadata db.

The following example blocks all groupBy queries on the `wikipedia` datasource with a query context parameter of `priority` equal to `0`:

```
POST /druid/coordinator/v1/config/broker
  {
    "queryBlocklist": [
      {
        "ruleName": "block-wikipedia-groupbys",
        "dataSources": ["wikipedia"],
        "queryTypes": ["groupBy"],
        "contextMatches": {"priority": "0"}
      }
    ]
  }
```

[#19011](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19011)

### Minor compaction for Overlord-based compaction (experimental)

> You can now configure minor compaction. With minor compaction, Druid only compacts newly ingested segments while upgrading existing compacted segments. When Druid upgrades segments, it updates the metadata instead of using resources to compact it again. You can use the native compaction engine or the  MSQ task engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now configure minor compaction to compact only newly ingested segments while upgrading existing compacted segments. When Druid upgrades segments, it updates the metadata instead of using resources to compact it again. You can use the native compaction engine or the  MSQ task engine.
```
reduce repetittion

Use the `mostFragmentedFirst` compaction policy and set either a percentage of rows-based or byte-based threshold for minor compaction.

[#19059](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19059) [#19205](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19205) [#19016](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19016)

### Thrift input format

As part of the Thrift contributor extension, Druid now supports Thrift-encoded data for Kafka and Kinesis streaming ingestion.

[#19111](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19111)

To use this feature, you must add `druid-thrift-extensions` to your extension load list.

### Kubernetes-based task management

This extension is now generally available.

[#19128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19128)

### Tombstones

Tombstones for JSON-based native batch ingestion (the `dropExisting` flag for `ioConfig`) are now generally available.

[#19128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19128)

### Dynamic default query context

> You can now add default query context parameters as a dynamic configuration to the Broker. This allows you to override static defaults set in your runtime properties without restarting your deployment or having to update multiple queries individually. Druid resolves which query context parameters to use based on the following priority:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now add default query context parameters as a dynamic configuration to the Broker. This allows you to override static defaults set in your runtime properties without restarting your deployment or having to update multiple queries individually. Druid applies query context parameters based on the following priority:
```

1. The query context included with the query
1. The query context set as a dynamic configuration on the Broker
1. The query context parameters set in the runtime properties
1. The defaults that ship with Druid

Note that like other Broker dynamic configuration, this is best-effort. Settings may not be applied in certain

> cases, such as when a Broker has recently started and hasn't received the config yet, or if the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cases, such as when a Broker has recently started and hasn't received the configuration yet, or if the
```

Broker can't contact the Coordinator. If a query context parameter is critical for all your queries, set it in the runtime properties.

[#19146](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19146)

### `sys.queries` table (experimental)

> The new system queries table provides information about currently running and recently completed queries that use the Dart engine. This table is off by default. To enable the table, set the following config:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new system queries table provides information about currently running and recently completed queries that use the Dart engine. This table is off by default. To enable the table, set the following:
```

```
druid.sql.planner.enableSysQueriesTable = true
```

As part of this change, the `/druid/v2/sql/queries` API now supports an `includeComplete` parameter that shows recently completed queries.

[#18923](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18923)

### Auto-compaction with compaction supervisors

Auto-compaction using compaction supervisors has been improved and is now generally available.

> As part of the improvement, instead of individual compacted segments having to store their full compaction state in the metadata store, states are now stored in a central location, a new `indexingStates` table, in the metadata store. Individual segments only need to store a unique reference (`indexing_state_fingerprint`) to their full compaction state. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the improvement compaction states are now stored in a central location, a new `indexingStates` table. Individual segments only need to store a unique reference (`indexing_state_fingerprint`) to their full compaction state.
```
Not sure why the previous functionality is relevant

Since many segments in a single datasource share the same underlying compaction state, this greatly reduces metadata storage requirements for automatic compaction.

> For backwards compatibility, detailed compaction state will continue to be persisted in each segment for now. This will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For backwards compatibility, Druid continues to persist the detailed compaction state in each segment. This functionality will be removed in a future release.
```

- Renamed **Current size** to **Assigned size**.
- Renamed **Max size** to **Effective size**. It now displays the smaller value between `max_size` and `storage_size`. The max size is still shown as a tooltip.
- Changed usage calculation to use `effective_size`

[#19007](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19007)

#### Other web console improvements

- Added `workerDesc` to `WorkerStats`, which makes it easier to identify where a worker is running [#19171](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19171)
- Added the Dart unique execution ID (`dartQueryId`) and the `sqlQueryId` to the **Details** pane in the web console [#19185](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19185)
- Added support for showing completed Dart queries in the web console [#18940](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18940)
- Added a detail dialog to the **Services** page [#18960](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18960)
- Added icons to indicate when data is loaded into virtual storage, including a tooltip that shows all the counters for the data [#19010](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19010)
- Added support for Dart reports [#18897](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18897)

> - Changed what's considered an active worker: any nonzero rows, files, bytes, frames, or wall time is enough to consider a worker active [#19183](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19183)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Changed the criteria for active workers: any nonzero rows, files, bytes, frames, or wall time is enough to consider a worker active [#19183](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19183)
```

[#19040](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19040)

##### Other streaming ingestion improvements

- Improved cost-based autoscaler performance in high lag scenarios [#19045](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19045)
- Improved the performance of realtime task scheduling by ordering schedule requests by priority on the `TaskQueue` [#19203](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19203)

#### Ingestion improvements

- Sped up task scheduling on the Overlord [#19199](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19199)

### Querying

#### groupBy query configuration

Added a new groupBy query configuration property `druid.query.groupBy.maxSpillFileCount` to limit the maximum number of spill files created per query. When the limit is exceeded, the query fails with a clear error message instead of causing Historical nodes to run out of memory during spill file merging. The limit can also be overridden per query using the query context parameter `maxSpillFileCount`.

[#19141](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19141)

#### Improved handling of nested aggregates

> Druid can now merge two Aggregates with a Projection between them. For example, the following query:

Reviewer 2: why are aggregates and projections capilalized?

```

can be simplified to the following:

```sql
SELECT
  FLOOR(__time TO hour) hr,
  UPPER(dim2) x,
  COUNT(*) cnt,
  MIN(m1 * 5) mn,
  MAX(m1 + m2) mx
FROM druid.foo
WHERE dim2 IN ('abc', 'a', '')
GROUP BY 1, 2
```

[#18498](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18498)

#### Other querying improvements

- Added `durationMs` to Dart query reports [#19169](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19169)
- Improved error handling so that row signature column order is preserved when column analysis encounters an error [#19162](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19162)
- Improved GROUP BY performance [#18952](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18952)
- Improved expression filters to take advantage of specialized virtual columns when possible, resulting in better performance for the query [#18965](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18965)

### Cluster management

#### New Broker tier selection strategies

Operators can now configure two new Broker `TierSelectorStrategy` implementations:

- `strict` - Only selects servers whose priorities match the configured list. Example configuration: `druid.broker.select.tier=strict` and `druid.broker.select.tier.strict.priorities=[1]`.

> - `pooled` - Pools servers across the configured priorities and selects among them, allowing queries to utilize multiple priority tiers for improved availability. Example configuration: `druid.broker.select.tier=pooled` and `druid.broker.select.tier.pooled.priorities=[2,1]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `pooled` - Pools servers across the configured priorities and selects among them, allowing queries to use multiple priority tiers for improved availability. Example configuration: `druid.broker.select.tier=pooled` and `druid.broker.select.tier.pooled.priorities=[2,1]`.
```

> These strategies can also be configured for realtime servers using `druid.broker.realtime.select.tier`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use `druid.broker.realtime.select.tier` to  configure these strategies for realtime servers.
```

### Metrics and monitoring

#### Version field

All Druid metrics now include `version` and `buildRevision` fields to help you identify which version of Druid is emitting a metric. You can use this information to verify that all nodes in a cluster are running the intended revision during rolling deployments.

[#19123](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19123)

#### Monitoring supervisor state

Added a new `supervisor/count` metric when `SupervisorStatsMonitor` is enabled in `druid.monitoring.monitors`. The metric reports each supervisor’s state, such as `RUNNING` or `SUSPENDED`, for Prometheus, StatsD, and other metric systems.

[#19114](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19114)

#### Improved `groupBy` metrics

`GroupByStatsMonitor` now provides the following metrics:

- `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` 
- `mergeBuffer/maxAcquisitionTimeNs`
- `groupBy/maxSpilledBytes`
- `groupBy/maxMergeDictionarySize`

[#18731](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18731) [#18970](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18970) [#18934](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18934)

#### Filtering metrics

> Operators can limit which metrics the logging emitter writes by setting `druid.emitter.logging.shouldFilterMetrics=true` and, if desired, `druid.emitter.logging.allowedMetricsPath` to a JSON object file where the keys are metric names. A missing custom file results in a warning and use of the bundled `defaultMetrics.json`. Alerts and other non-metric events are always logged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operators can set `druid.emitter.logging.shouldFilterMetrics=true` to limit which metrics the logging emitter writes. Optionally, they can set `druid.emitter.logging.allowedMetricsPath` to a JSON object file where the keys are metric names. A missing custom file results in a warning and use of the bundled `defaultMetrics.json`. Alerts and other non-metric events are always logged.
```

[#19030](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19030)

#### New Broker metrics

> Added `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/changed` and `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/column/count` metrics to get visibility into when the Broker's segment metadata cache's row signature for each datasource is initialized and updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Added `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/changed` and `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/column/count` metrics to expose events when the Broker initializes and updates the row signature in the the segment metadata cache for each datasource.
```

[#18966](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18966)

#### Other metrics and monitoring improvements

- Added the following metrics to the default for Prometheus: `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` and `mergeBuffer/maxBytesUsed` [#19110](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19110)

> - Added compaction mode to what gets emitted for the `compact/task/count` metric [#19151](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19151)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added compaction mode to the `compact/task/count` metric [#19151](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19151)
```

- Added support for logging and emitting SQL dynamic parameter values [#19067](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19067)

> - Added `ingest/rows/published`, which gets emitted from all task types to denote the total row count of successfully published segments [#19177](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19177)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added `ingest/rows/published`, which all task types emit to denote the total row count of successfully published segments [#19177](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19177)
```

> - Added `queries` and `totalQueries` counters, which reflect queries made to realtime servers to get realtime data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added `queries` and `totalQueries` counters, which reflect queries made to realtime servers to retrieve realtime data
```

> - Added `tier/storage/capacity` metric for the Coordinator to emit that is guaranteed to reflect the total `StorageLocation` size configured across all Historicals in a tier [#18962](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18962)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added `tier/storage/capacity` metric for the Coordinator. This metric is guaranteed to reflect the total `StorageLocation` size configured across all Historicals in a tier [#18962](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18962)
```

- Added new metrics for virtual storage fabric to the MSQ task engine `ChannelCounters`: `loadBytes`, `loadTime`, `loadWait`, and `loadFiles` [#18971](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18971)
- Added `storage/virtual/hit/bytes`, `storage/virtual/hold/count` and `storage/virtual/hold/bytes` metric to `StorageMonitor`
[#18895](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18895) [#19217](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19217)
- Added `supervisorId` dimension for streaming tasks to `TaskCountStatsMonitor` [#18920](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18920)
- Changed `StorageMonitor` to always be on [#19048](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19048)
- Improved the metrics for autoscalers, so that they all emit the same metrics: `supervisorId`, `dataSource`, and `stream` [#19097](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19097)

### Extensions

#### gRPC 

The gRPC query extension now cancels in-flight queries when clients cancel or disconnect.

[#19005](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19005)

#### Iceberg 

##### GCS warehouse

> The Iceberg input source now supports GCS warehouses. To use this feature, you need to load the `druid-google-extensions` extension in addition to the Iceberg extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Iceberg input source now supports GCS warehouses. To use this feature, you must load the `druid-google-extensions` extension in addition to the Iceberg extension.
```

#### Segment metadata cache on by default

Starting in Druid 37, the segment metadata cache is on by default. This feature allows the Broker to cache segment metadata polled from the Coordinator, rather than having to fetch metadata for every query against the `sys.segments` table. This improves performance but increases memory usage on Brokers.

The `druid.sql.planner.metadataSegmentCacheEnable` config controls this feature.

[#19075](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19075)

#### Streaming ingestion `parser`

Support for the deprecated `parser` has been removed for streaming ingest tasks such as Kafka and Kinesis. Operators must now specify `inputSource`/`inputFormat` on the `ioConfig` of the supervisor spec, and the `dataSchema` must not specify a parser. Do this before upgrading to Druid 37 or newer.

[#19173](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19173) [#19166](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19166)

#### Rolling upgrades from Druid versions prior to version 0.23

You can't perform a rolling upgrade from versions earlier than Druid 0.23.

[#18961](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18961)

#### Metadata storage for auto-compaction with compaction supervisors

> Automatic compaction using compaction supervisors now requires incremental segment metadata caching to be enabled on the Overlord and Coordinator via runtime properties. Specifically, the `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` config must be set to `always` or `ifSynced`. For more information about the config, see [Segment metadata cache](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#segment-metadata-cache-experimental).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Automatic compaction using compaction supervisors now requires incremental segment metadata caching to be enabled on the Overlord and Coordinator in the runtime properties. Specifically, the `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` config must be set to `always` or `ifSynced`. For more information about the config, see [Segment metadata cache](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#segment-metadata-cache-experimental).
```

Reviewer 2: same for upgrade notes page

[#19128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19128)

### Tombstones

Tombstones for JSON-based native batch ingestion (the `dropExisting` flag for `ioConfig`) are now generally available.

[#19128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19128)

### Dynamic default query context

You can now add default query context parameters as a dynamic configuration to the Broker. This allows you to override static defaults set in your runtime properties without restarting your deployment or having to update multiple queries individually. Druid applies query context parameters based on the following priority:

1. The query context included with the query
1. The query context set as a dynamic configuration on the Broker
1. The query context parameters set in the runtime properties
1. The defaults that ship with Druid

Note that like other Broker dynamic configuration, this is best-effort. Settings may not be applied in certain
cases, such as when a Broker has recently started and hasn't received the configuration yet, or if the
Broker can't contact the Coordinator. If a query context parameter is critical for all your queries, set it in the runtime properties.

> [#19146](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19146)

Reviewer: this link doesnt seem right. do you mean https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19144?

Author: It looks like 19146 is missing then. I'll fix this link and add 19146

> [#19146](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19146)

Author: ```suggestion

[#19144](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19144)
```

### `sys.queries` table (experimental)

The new system queries table provides information about currently running and recently completed queries that use the Dart engine. This table is off by default. To enable the table, set the following:

```
druid.sql.planner.enableSysQueriesTable = true
```

As part of this change, the `/druid/v2/sql/queries` API now supports an `includeComplete` parameter that shows recently completed queries.

[#18923](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18923)

> ### Auto-compaction with compaction supervisors

Reviewer: can you add https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19252 here as well? Overlord-based compaction supervisors are now the recommended and default approach for automatic compaction.

#### Segment metadata cache on by default

Starting in Druid 37, the segment metadata cache is on by default. This feature allows the Broker to cache segment metadata polled from the Coordinator, rather than having to fetch metadata for every query against the `sys.segments` table. This improves performance but increases memory usage on Brokers.

The `druid.sql.planner.metadataSegmentCacheEnable` config controls this feature.

[#19075](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19075)

#### Streaming ingestion `parser`

Support for the deprecated `parser` has been removed for streaming ingest tasks such as Kafka and Kinesis. Operators must now specify `inputSource`/`inputFormat` on the `ioConfig` of the supervisor spec, and the `dataSchema` must not specify a parser. Do this before upgrading to Druid 37 or newer.

[#19173](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19173) [#19166](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19166)

#### Rolling upgrades from Druid versions prior to version 0.23

You can't perform a rolling upgrade from versions earlier than Druid 0.23.

[#18961](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18961)

#### Metadata storage for auto-compaction with compaction supervisors

> Automatic compaction using compaction supervisors now requires incremental segment metadata caching to be enabled on the Overlord and Coordinator in the runtime properties. Specifically, the `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` config must be set to `always` or `ifSynced`. For more information about the config, see [Segment metadata cache](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#segment-metadata-cache-experimental).

Reviewer: this paragraph is no longer accurate after we default `useIncrementalCache` to `ifSynced`, also the segment metadata cache has came out of experimental.

Author: There's a blurb saying it's GA in the Important features section.

What do you mean by no longer accurate?

Reviewer: just meant users dont need to set useIncrementalCache since default already works, the change looks good

Additionally, metadata store changes are required for this upgrade.

> If you already have `druid.metadata.storage.connector.createTables` set to `true`, no action is needed.

Reviewer: `createTables` is also default to true, so this should all work automatically if users dont set `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` and `druid.metadata.storage.connector.createTables`. cc: @capistrant. 

maybe we should just add a first line saying if you dont have these modified, no action needed, otherwise ....

Author: What about updating it to say:

```
As part of this update, Druid requires the incremental cache to be enabled and a new table in the metadata store. No action is required if you are using the default settings for the following configs:

- `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` 
- `druid.metadata.storage.connector.createTables`

If `druid.manager.segments.useIncrementalCache` is set to `never`, update it to `ifSynced` or `always`. For more information about the config, see [Segment metadata cache](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration/#segment-metadata-cache-experimental).

If you set the `druid.metadata.storage.connector.createTables` config to `false`, you need to manually alter the segments table and create the `compactionStates` table. The Postgres DDL is provided below as a guide:
```

If you have this feature turned off, you will need to alter the segments table and create the `compactionStates` table. The Postgres DDL is provided below as a guide:

```
-- create the indexing states lookup table and associated indices
CREATE TABLE druid_indexingStates (
    created_date VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    datasource VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    fingerprint VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    payload BYTEA NOT NULL,
    used BOOLEAN NOT NULL,
    pending BOOLEAN NOT NULL,
    used_status_last_updated VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (fingerprint),
  );

  CREATE INDEX idx_druid_compactionStates_used ON druid_compactionStates(used, used_status_last_updated);
```

```
-- modify druid_segments table to have a column for storing compaction state fingerprints
ALTER TABLE druid_segments ADD COLUMN indexing_state_fingerprint VARCHAR(255);
```

You may have to adapt the syntax to fit your table naming prefix and metadata store backend.

[#18844](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18844)

#### Segment locking

> Segment locking and `NumberedOverwriteShardSpec` are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Use time chunk locking instead. You can make sure only time chunk locking is used by setting `druid.indexer.tasklock.forceTimeChunkLock` to `true`.

Reviewer: maybe worth mentioning `druid.indexer.tasklock.forceTimeChunkLock` is `true` by default, i guess we should have deprecate segment locking long long time ago, cc: @clintropolis .

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Hadoop-based ingestion

Support for Hadoop-based ingestion has been removed. The feature was deprecated in Druid 34.

Use one of Druid's other supported ingestion methods, such as SQL-based ingestion or MiddleManager-less ingestion using Kubernetes.

[#19109](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19109)

### Query blocklist

> You can now use the using the `/druid/coordinator/v1/config/broker` API to create a query blocklist to dynamically block queries by datasource, query type, or query context. The blocklist takes effect without a restarting Druid. Block rules use `AND` logic, which means all criteria must match.

Reviewer 3: >You can now use the using the ...

this seems to be missing something

### Cascading reindexing (experimental)

Using cascading reindexing, you can now define age-based rules to automatically apply different compaction configurations based on the age of your data. While standard auto-compaction applies a single flat configuration across an entire datasource, cascading reindexing lets you tailor your compaction settings to the characteristics of your data.

For example, you can keep recent data in hourly segments while automatically rolling up to daily segments after 90 days to reduce segment count. You can also layer on age-based row deletion (such as dropping bot traffic from older data), change compression settings, or shift to rollup with coarser query granularity as data ages. Rules are defined inline in the supervisor spec.

You must use compaction supervisors with the MSQ task engine to use cascading reindexing.

[#18939](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18939) [#19213](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19213) [#19106](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19106) [#19078](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19078)

### Thrift input format

> As part of the Thrift contributor extension, Druid now supports Thrift-encoded data for Kafka and Kinesis streaming ingestion.

Reviewer 3: technically we already supported it before, but only when using the deprecated parser/parsespec stuff that has been removed in this release, so the new thing is that it supports the modern `InputFormat` stuff

[#19111](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19111)

To use this feature, you must add `druid-thrift-extensions` to your extension load list.

### Incremental cache

Incremental segment metadata cache (`useIncrementalCache`) is now generally available and defaults to `ifSynced`. Druid blocks reads from the cache until it has synced with the metadata store at least once after becoming leader.

[#19252](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19252)

### Kubernetes-based task management

This extension is now generally available.

[#19128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19128)

### Tombstones

> Tombstones for JSON-based native batch ingestion (the `dropExisting` flag for `ioConfig`) are now generally available.

Reviewer 3: this should probably indicate that this was more of an oversight/mistake of not updating docs than really anything changing since these have been used in production for quite a long time, and are not even optional in msq

To specify a Broker, add the following config to `web-console/console-config.js`:

```js
consoleBrokerService: 'druid/BROKER_NAME'
```

[#19069](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19069)

### Consul extension

The contributor extension `druid-consul-extensions` lets Druid clusters use Consul for service discovery and
Coordinator/Overlord leader election instead of ZooKeeper. The extension supports ACLs, TLS/mTLS, and metrics. 

Before you switch to Consul, you need to set
`druid.serverview.type=http` and `druid.indexer.runner.type=httpRemote` cluster wide.

[#18843](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18843)

## Functional area and related changes

This section contains detailed release notes separated by areas.

### Web console

#### Changed storage column displays

- Improved the compaction config view to 
- Renamed **Current size** to **Assigned size**.
- Renamed **Max size** to **Effective size**. It now displays the smaller value between `max_size` and `storage_size`. The max size is still shown as a tooltip.
- Changed usage calculation to use `effective_size`

[#19007](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19007)

> 

Reviewer: this part doesnt read smooth to me, this is part of showing storage metric for data nodes i believe, this change is also related with vsf, do you mind take a look at this, @clintropolis ?

Reviewer 3: yea, this is related to vsf mode where the actual size disk size is separate from the amount of data the node is responsible for, so we updated this UI to be able to show the ratio of assigned segment size to actual disk size. No real change other than labels if not vsf mode

- Added support for showing completed Dart queries in the web console [#18940](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18940)
- Added a detail dialog to the **Services** page [#18960](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18960)
- Added icons to indicate when data is loaded into virtual storage, including a tooltip that shows all the counters for the data [#19010](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19010)
- Added support for Dart reports [#18897](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18897)
- Changed the criteria for active workers: any nonzero rows, files, bytes, frames, or wall time is enough to consider a worker active [#19183](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19183)
- Changed the **Cancel query** option to show only if a query is in an accepted or running state [#19182](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19182)
- Changed the ordering of the current Dart queries panel to show queries in the following order: RUNNING, ACCEPTED, and then COMPLETED. RUNNING and ACCEPTED queries are ordered by the most recent first (based on timestamp). COMPLETED queries are sorted by finish time [#19237](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19237)

### Ingestion

> - Added the `maxStringLength` configuration for string dimensions that truncates values exceeding the specified length during ingestion. You can set the length globally using `druid.indexing.formats.maxStringLength` or per-dimension in the ingestion spec [#19146](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19146)

Reviewer 3: this was refactored into `columnFormatSpec` on the string column in #19258, this and the other related bullet should all be combined

    }
  }
```

This is useful when different datasources have different performance characteristics — for example, allowing longer timeouts for larger datasets.

[#19221](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19221)

#### Durable storage cleaner

The durable storage cleaner now supports configurable time-based retention for MSQ query results. Previously, query results were retained for all known tasks, which was unreliable for completed tasks. With this change, query results are retained for a configurable time period based on the task creation time.

The new configuration property `druid.msq.intermediate.storage.cleaner.durationToRetain` controls the retention period for query results. The default retention period is 6 hours.

[#19074](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19074)

#### Other data management improvements

- Added the `druid.storage.transfer.asyncHttpClientType` config that specifies which async HTTP client to use for S3 transfers: `crt` for Amazon CRT or `netty` for Netty NIO [#19249](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19249)
- Added a mechanism to automatically clean up intermediary files on HDFS storage [#19187](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19187)

> - Changed the default value for `druid.indexing.formats.maxStringLength` to null from 0 [#19198](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19198)

Reviewer 3: this probably doesn't need documented separately from `columnFormatSpec` on the string column since it is related to that

- `docker-java-bom` from `3.6.0` to `3.7.0` [#18990](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18990)
- `assertj-core` from `3.24.2` to `3.27.7` [#18994](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18994)
- `maven-surefire-plugin` from `3.2.5` to `3.5.4` [#18847](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18847)
- `guice` from `5.1.0` to `6.0.0` [#18986](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18986)
- JDK compiler from 11 to 17 [#18977](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18977)
- `vertx` from `4.5.14` to `4.5.24` [#18947](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18947)
- `fabric8` from `7.4.0` to `7.5.2` [#18947](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18947)
- `mockito` from `5.14.2` to `5.23` [#19145](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19145)
- `easymock` from `5.2.0` to `5.6.0` [#19145](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19145)
- `equalsverifier` from `3.15.8` to `4.4.1` [#19145](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19145)
- `bytebuddy` from `1.18.3` to `1.18.5` [#19145](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19145)
- Added `objenesis` `3.5` [#19145](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19145)
- `org.apache.zookeeper` from 3.8.4 to 3.8.6 [#19135](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19135)

> - Added AWS SDK `2.40.0` [#18891](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18891)

Reviewer 3: this is a pretty big update to aws sdk libraries going from 1.x to 2.x, maybe deserves more callout

Reviewer 4: +1 IMHO, we should call this out in upgrade notes.

### Cascading reindexing (experimental)

Using cascading reindexing, you can now define age-based rules to automatically apply different compaction configurations based on the age of your data. While standard auto-compaction applies a single flat configuration across an entire datasource, cascading reindexing lets you tailor your compaction settings to the characteristics of your data.

For example, you can keep recent data in hourly segments while automatically rolling up to daily segments after 90 days to reduce segment count. You can also layer on age-based row deletion (such as dropping bot traffic from older data), change compression settings, or shift to rollup with coarser query granularity as data ages. Rules are defined inline in the supervisor spec.

You must use compaction supervisors with the MSQ task engine to use cascading reindexing.

[#18939](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18939) [#19213](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19213) [#19106](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19106) [#19078](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19078)

> 

Reviewer 5: I think it’s worth calling out here or in a separate section that multi-supervisor ingestion is no longer experimental: https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18983

cc: @jtuglu1

- `pooled` - Pools servers across the configured priorities and selects among them, allowing queries to use multiple priority tiers for improved availability. Example configuration: `druid.broker.select.tier=pooled` and `druid.broker.select.tier.pooled.priorities=[2,1]`.

You can also use `druid.broker.realtime.select.tier` to  configure these strategies for realtime servers.

[#19094](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19094)

#### Druid operator

The Druid operator now resides in its own repository: [`apache/druid-operator`](https://github.com/apache/druid-operator).

[#19156](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19156)

#### Cost-based autoscaler algorithm

The algorithm for cost-based autoscaling has been changed:

- Scale up more aggressively when per-partition lag is meaningful
- Relax the partitions-per-task increase limit based on lag severity and headroom
- Keep behavior conservative near `taskCountMax` and avoid negative headroom effects 

[#18936](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18936)

#### Other cluster management improvements

> - Added a `ReadOnly` authorizer that allows all READ operations but denies any other operation, such as WRITE [#19243](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19243)

Reviewer 5: @aho135 @317brian what do you think about adding a brief note linking https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19272 for the read only authorizer (as a fix to an issue), since the fix isn’t included in 37.0.0?

Reviewer: I probably should have included it in rc2, maybe we could add this:

This is the first read-only authorizer in Druid, it enforces a global restriction by denying all non-READ operations, but also means API-level permission misconfigurations cannot be corrected via access configuration alone (e.g., GET `/druid/indexer/v1/supervisor` endpoint incorrectly requiring WRITE access, which is fixed in PR #19272 but not included in this release).

[#19221](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19221)

#### Durable storage cleaner

The durable storage cleaner now supports configurable time-based retention for MSQ query results. Previously, query results were retained for all known tasks, which was unreliable for completed tasks. With this change, query results are retained for a configurable time period based on the task creation time.

The new configuration property `druid.msq.intermediate.storage.cleaner.durationToRetain` controls the retention period for query results. The default retention period is 6 hours.

[#19074](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19074)

#### Other data management improvements

- Added the `druid.storage.transfer.asyncHttpClientType` config that specifies which async HTTP client to use for S3 transfers: `crt` for Amazon CRT or `netty` for Netty NIO [#19249](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19249)
- Added a mechanism to automatically clean up intermediary files on HDFS storage [#19187](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19187)

### Metrics and monitoring

> #### Version field

Reviewer 5: `buildRevision` is the new field (`version` already existed; only doc updates were made for this existing field):
```suggestion
#### BuildRevision field
```

> All Druid metrics now include `version` and `buildRevision` fields to help you identify which version of Druid is emitting a metric. You can use this information to verify that all nodes in a cluster are running the intended revision during rolling deployments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
All Druid metrics now include a `buildRevision` field to help identify the Git build revision of the Druid server emitting a metric. You can use this information to verify that all nodes in a cluster are running the intended revision.
```

[#19123](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19123)

#### Monitoring supervisor state

Added a new `supervisor/count` metric when `SupervisorStatsMonitor` is enabled in `druid.monitoring.monitors`. The metric reports each supervisor’s state, such as `RUNNING` or `SUSPENDED`, for Prometheus, StatsD, and other metric systems.

[#19114](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19114)

#### Improved `groupBy` metrics

`GroupByStatsMonitor` now provides the following metrics:

> - `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` 
- `mergeBuffer/maxBytesUsed` 
```

- `mergeBuffer/maxAcquisitionTimeNs`
- `groupBy/maxSpilledBytes`
- `groupBy/maxMergeDictionarySize`

[#18731](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18731) [#18970](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18970) [#18934](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18934)

#### Filtering metrics

Operators can set `druid.emitter.logging.shouldFilterMetrics=true` to limit which metrics the logging emitter writes. Optionally, they can set `druid.emitter.logging.allowedMetricsPath` to a JSON object file where the keys are metric names. A missing custom file results in a warning and use of the bundled `defaultMetrics.json`. Alerts and other non-metric events are always logged.

[#19030](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19030)

#### New Broker metrics

Added `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/changed` and `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/column/count` metrics to expose events when the Broker initializes and updates the row signature in the the segment metadata cache for each datasource.

> [#18966](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18966)

Reviewer 5: Bug fix #19162 appears to be missing from the release notes

I can’t recall whether both a “Release note” section in the PR summary and a release note GitHub label are required for changes to appear in the release notes docs

Author: We typically don't include bug fixes in the release notes unless requested. I'm not sure why historically, but that's been the process since I've worked on Druid

> #### Other metrics and monitoring improvements

Reviewer 5: I  think this is worth calling out as an experimental perf feature for task init speedup:
#19022

Reviewer: do you mean a different PR? #19022 is not merged

### Metrics and monitoring

#### BuildRevision field

All Druid metrics now include a `buildRevision` field to help identify the Git build revision of the Druid server emitting a metric. You can use this information to verify that all nodes in a cluster are running the intended revision.

[#19123](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19123)

#### Monitoring supervisor state

Added a new `supervisor/count` metric when `SupervisorStatsMonitor` is enabled in `druid.monitoring.monitors`. The metric reports each supervisor’s state, such as `RUNNING` or `SUSPENDED`, for Prometheus, StatsD, and other metric systems.

[#19114](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19114)

#### Improved `groupBy` metrics

`GroupByStatsMonitor` now provides the following metrics:

- `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` 
- `mergeBuffer/maxBytesUsed` 
- `mergeBuffer/maxAcquisitionTimeNs`
- `groupBy/maxSpilledBytes`
- `groupBy/maxMergeDictionarySize`

[#18731](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18731) [#18970](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18970) [#18934](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18934)

#### Filtering metrics

> Operators can set `druid.emitter.logging.shouldFilterMetrics=true` to limit which metrics the logging emitter writes. Optionally, they can set `druid.emitter.logging.allowedMetricsPath` to a JSON object file where the keys are metric names. A missing custom file results in a warning and use of the bundled `defaultMetrics.json`. Alerts and other non-metric events are always logged.

Reviewer: `defaultMetrics.json` has been renamed to `loggingEmitterAllowedMetrics.json` in https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19359. Backport PR: https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19371

[#19030](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19030) [#19359](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19359)

#### New Broker metrics

Added `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/changed` and `segment/schemaCache/rowSignature/column/count` metrics to expose events when the Broker initializes and updates the row signature in the segment metadata cache for each datasource.

[#18966](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18966)

#### Other metrics and monitoring improvements

- Added the following metrics to the default for Prometheus: `mergeBuffer/bytesUsed` and `mergeBuffer/maxBytesUsed` [#19110](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19110)
- Added compaction mode to the `compact/task/count` metric [#19151](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19151)
- Added support for logging and emitting SQL dynamic parameter values [#19067](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19067)
- Added `ingest/rows/published`, which all task types emit to denote the total row count of successfully published segments [#19177](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19177)

> - Added `queries` and `totalQueries` counters, which reflect queries made to realtime servers to retrieve realtime data

Reviewer: this is from https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19196?

Multi-supervisor ingestion is now generally available. You can run multiple stream supervisors that ingest into the same datasource.

[#18983](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18983)

### Read-only authorizer

Added a `ReadOnly` authorizer to Druid. This is the first global authorizer for Druid. The authorizer enforces a global restriction on all non-READ operations, denying them regardless of individual user permissions. You can use this capability to ensure all users of a specific authorizer are limited to READ access.

There is a known limitation where some endpoints currently require WRITE access despite being READ-only, such as `GET /druid/indexer/v1/supervisor`. These operations will fail.

[#19243](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19243)

### Thrift input format

As part of the Thrift contributor extension, Druid now supports Thrift-encoded data for Kafka and Kinesis streaming ingestion using `InputFormat`. Previously, Druid  supported this through parsers, which have been removed in Druid 37.

[#19111](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19111)

To use this feature, you must add `druid-thrift-extensions` to your extension load list.

> ### Incremental cache

Reviewer 6: @317brian , this item should also be called out in the upgrade-notes for Druid 37 release since it affects the Overlord memory usage. We would also need to provide a rough estimate for the increase in Overlord memory.

### Ingestion

- Added the `maxStringLength` configuration for string dimensions that truncates values exceeding the specified length during ingestion. You can set the length globally using `druid.indexing.formats.maxStringLength` or per-dimension in the ingestion spec [#19146](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19146)
- Added `StringColumnFormatSpec` for string dimension configs [#19258](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19258)

> - Sped up task scheduling on the Overlord [#19199](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19199)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Speed up task scheduling on the Overlord [#19199](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/19199)
```

Author: `Sped` is the correct tense

#### Metadata storage for auto-compaction with compaction supervisors

> Automatic compaction using compaction supervisors requires incremental segment metadata caching to be enabled on the Overlord and Coordinator in the runtime properties. 
> 
> As part of this update, Druid requires the incremental cache to be enabled and a new table in the metadata store. No action is required if you are using the default settings for the following configs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic compaction with supervisors requires incremental segment metadata caching on Overlord and a new metadata store table; no action is required if you are using the default settings for the following configs:
```
